# ms274_BullKelp_Project

Abstract

Kelp forests are critical habitats that form the foundation of many nearshore ecosystems. They provide key functions such as primary production, reduced erosion, carbon sequestration, and habitat for thousands of other seaweeds and animals. However, despite being one of the most diverse and productive ecosystems, kelp forests are highly dynamic and experience large changes in space and time. Following the marine heatwave in 2014, bull kelp (Nereocystis luetkeana) declined in abundance by more than 90% over a 350 km stretch of coastline in Northern California (McPherson et al. 2021). While stressors were present prior to the collapse in 2014, this event demonstrates the need for a better understanding of the factors that influence bull kelp variation. Wintertime ocean conditions have been shown to be a good predictor of bull kelp kelp cover in the following summer (García-Reyes et al. 2022). This could be due to the effects of upwelling and temperature on nutrient availability for the settled bull kelp gametophytes (García-Reyes et al. 2022). However, due to the widespread loss of bull kelp it can be hard to track how these factors effect populations at a large scale. With the use of satellite imagery and remote sensing we can start to gain a better understanding of the spatial and temporal variation in bull kelp. Using these tools we can hopefully predict how future marine heatwaves and anomalous wintertime conditions might impact bull kelp persistence. 

García-Reyes, M., Thompson, S. A., Rogers-Bennett, L., & Sydeman, W. J. (2022). Winter oceanographic conditions predict summer bull kelp canopy cover in northern California. PLOS ONE, 17(5), e0267737. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0267737


McPherson, M. L., Finger, D. J. I., Houskeeper, H. F., Bell, T. W., Carr, M. H., Rogers-Bennett, L., & Kudela, R. M. (2021). Large-scale shift in the structure of a kelp forest ecosystem co-occurs with an epizootic and marine heatwave. Communications Biology, 4(1), 298. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-01827-6
